---
layout: post
title: "Applying PhD for dummies"
date: 2012-09-04 14:57
comments: true
categories: study, phd, toefl, gre, school
---

Applying for a PhD degree can be troublesome. There are agencies out there
helping people deal with the process. Is it really necessary to pay lots of
money for that? My answer is simply negative. You can definitely prepare that
all by yourself. You just need a right set of tool to track the progress. I will
share my experience of applying both the PhD and F-1 VISA (this part only
applies to students in Taiwan.  As your experience may vary in different
countries). I did the application very late and it resulted in a rush
application process. Hope by sharing my experience, you can apply for PhD
easily with confidence. :)

What do you need?
=======================================

Before you begin to apply for the school, there are some prerequisites you need
to take care of. Here is a short list:

  * TOEFL examination
  * GRE examination
  * Résumé
  * Statement of Purpose (and/or Personal Statement)
  * Financial Support Document
  * Transcripts for your BS and MS degree

Please note that this may not be a complete list of everything you will need.
Schools you want to apply may ask for additional documents. If you want to
apply for the Fall semester. The deadline is usually on the December of
previous year. For example, you want to apply for Fall 2012. The application
deadline would be around Dec. 2011 to Jan. 2012. I would suggest you to take
care all of the examinations before November and leave a whole month for
getting your application ready as you will need to wait deliveries of every
documents and letters of recommendation(LoR).

TOEFL/GRE
---------

You usually need to have your examinations scores delivered to the school by
the end of the application deadline. Some schools may have for a week or two
extension for test scores. Because the ETS can sometimes be very unproductive,
I would suggest you to finish the test before November. Oh, please take a note
of the TOEFL/GRE institution code of your target schools. You can request a few
free copies on the spot of taking tests. This will save you save money. :P

I don't really have tips for preparing, as I did not prepare it well. However,
there is some insights I can share. If you go to PTT(Taiwan's largest
electronic bulletin board system, popular among the university students) and
read those test-taking experience shared in TOEFL/GRE board. You will see that
many people complaining about the noise for oral tests. Here is one thing I can
tell you, do your tests quickly. If you're quick enough, you can be the first
one to take the speaking tests. And if this is the case, then nobody will make
any noise. You can relax and do your tests at the best.

If you have a friend lives in the states and you can talk to him/her using
English easily. You will have no problem on TOEFL test. However, GRE is a 180
degree turn. The verbal part of GRE may still be a pain in the ass, while the
quantitative part is usually easy for Taiwanese students. We all have that
miserable experience on preparing for 指考, right? You will definitely need
some time to memorize some advanced vocabulary for GRE. Another thing that you
may want to practice is AWA. AWA is like writing a small thesis on a given
topic. There is no right or wrong on your perspective. However, you will need
to express your opinion systematically and defense your prospective with solid
reason. My tips? Write, write, and read. Find some time to write things down in
English, preferably a long blog post or diaries. Read some articles from some
well-known journals or magazines. Once you get used to the way of Americans
thinking, you should not have problem on AWA.

Last thing to do before taking tests: Spend a day to read some example test
questions. It is not your objective to memorize all the questions. What you
need to do is to get used to different kind of questions and know how to rush
to an answer in no time.

Résumé
------

I think that you should have your résumé prepared anytime. Trust me. You will
not want to write down your whole life in a day. It will be an erroneous and
boring process. I would suggest you to write in Markdown syntax (or any plain
text formatting syntax you prefer). Writing things down in plain text format
can help you to organize things quicker. If you use Markdown, you can easily
convert it into a web page and put it somewhere for display. I will suggest
that you do a separate print version using LaTeX, as the template based on
LaTeX gives a professional look. It is so easy to maintain compared to those
made using Word, Pages or even InDesign.

You can find my résumé [here](http://itszero.github.com/resume). Make sure you
put down those sections: basic personal information, education histories, work
experiences, publications, some projects that you involved in before. You may
want to put as many information as possible to show your strength, but do not
make it more than 2 pages. Professors and your future employers simply do not
have time to read a long long résumé. Keep it clean and simple. Highlights the
most important things in your life!

SoP and PS
----------

SoP (Statement of Purpose) and PS (Personal Statement) is quite confusing, at
least it is for me. The purpose of those two document is actually the same. It
presents your background and personality. I distinguish those two by applying
more personal touch to the personal statement. You may want to use one or two
paragraph to state a personal experience that leads you to your current study,
while focus your SoP solely on the what you want to do in the future. I think
it should be fit in a page or two. I doubt professors would have much time
reading it, so make it simple and clear.

Financial Document
------------------

Hum, this should be the easiest part. I'm not going to waste any time here.
You just deposit money into an account, and apply for the "Certificate of
Deposit", or 存款證明 in Chinese. For the amount, please ask your school for
the details.  However, an average number would be USD$20000~30000. Some school
may not request for it until they're applying I-20 for you. If that is the case
and you have a scholarship or assistantship offering, you may ask your
department or graduate office for the correct amount you will need to prepare.

Some Tips
---------

During the process, I would suggest you to use some spreadsheets software for
managing application process of all different schools. [Google
Docs](http://docs.google.com/) would be a good choice. Make sure you print (as
PDF, to save papers) and archive everything. Track every letter of
recommendations, TOEFL/GRE scores and results. If you do this, you will always
have a dashboard for all those different applications. Likewise, since you will
need to log into many systems during the application. I would suggest you to
use some password manager like [1Password](https://agilebits.com/onepassword),
[KeePass](http://keepass.info/) to track every used password, because every
system will have its own requirement on password. It will help a lot.

Conclusions
-----------

You should have everything you need to know by now. For the things I didn't
mentioned above, look for your desired school. You might find some help on the
internet as well. Try StudyAbroad on PTT BBS if you're a Taiwanese student. I
hope this experience can be of help. I also hope that you will be admitted by your
favorite school. ;)
